content/post/Tools/GitHub Actions Sending Timed Weather Emails/index.md, before:

---
title: GitHub Actions (Sending Timed Weather Emails)
description: GitHub Actions：定时发送天气邮件
date: '2023-11-28'
categories:
    - Tools
tags:
    - Tools
---

# GitHub Actions: Sending Timed Weather Emails

2019年底的时候，GitHub正式开放了[GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions)这个功能，可以免费使用。

GitHub Actions 是一个 CI/CD（持续集成/持续部署）工具，但也可用作代码运行环境。功能非常强大，能够玩出许多花样。

这里使用GitHub Actions完成一个实例：每天定时运行一次脚本，获取天气预报，发送电子邮件。

完整代码可以从[GitHub](https://github.com/JavenJin/weather-action)仓库获取。

## 获取天气预报

网站[wttr.in](wttr.in)支持使用命令行请求天气预报。

```bash
curl wttr.in
```

上面的命令会返回，当前IP地址的天气。

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails1.png)

我们可以在URL中指定城市。

```bash
curl wttr.in/Xian
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails2.png)

返回的数据可以通过`curl`命令的`-o`参数，保存成文件，以便后面发送。

```bash
curl -o result.html wttr.in/Xian
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails3.png)

wttr.in允许定制天气预报的格式和内容，详见[https://github.com/chubin/wttr.in](https://github.com/chubin/wttr.in)，这里就不展开了。最后封装好的脚本[weather.sh](https://github.com/JavenJin/weather-action/blob/main/weather.sh)，完整代码如下：

```bash
#!/bin/sh

set -eux

CITY=Xian
LANGUAGE="zh-CN"
UNIT=m

curl \
  -H "Accept-Language: $LANGUAGE" \
  -o result.html \
  wttr.in/$CITY?format=4\&$UNIT
```

## 配置发送邮件账户

我使用的是网易163邮箱的免费发送服务，也可以使用其他邮箱。

需要首先在网易163邮箱中生成授权码。

1. 登录网易163邮箱（[https://mail.163.com/](https://mail.163.com/)）

2. 点击设置，选择设置POP3/SMTP/IMAP

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails4.png)

3. 点击新增授权密码，保存好该授权密码。

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails5.png)

## 配置GitHub Actions

触发GitHub Actions需要在项目仓库新建一个`.github/workflows`子目录，里面是YAML格式配置文件，文件名可以随便取。GitHub只要发现配置文件，就会运行Actions。

配置文件的第一部分是触发条件。

```yaml
name: 'GitHub Action Weather Bot'

on:
  push:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 0 * * *'
```

上面代码中，`name`字段是配置文件的描述，`on`字段是触发条件。我们指定两种情况下触发，第一种是代码Push进仓库，第二种是定时任务，每天在国际标准时间0点（北京时间早上8点）运行。

接着，就是运行流程。

```yaml
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: 'Checkout codes'
        uses: actions/checkout@v1
```

上面代码中，运行环境指定为最新版的 Ubuntu。流程的第一步是从代码仓库获取代码。

拿到代码以后，就可以获取天气预报了。

```yaml
      - name: 'Get Weather'
        run: bash ./weather.sh
```

上面代码中，`run`字段就是所要运行的命令。

最后，发送邮件。

```yaml
      - name: 'Send mail'
        uses: dawidd6/action-send-mail@master
        with:
          server_address: smtp.163.com
          server_port: 465
          username: ${{ secrets.MAIL_USERNAME }}
          password: ${{ secrets.MAIL_PASSWORD }}
          subject: Xian Weather Report (${{env.REPORT_DATE}})
          body: file://result.html
          to: ${{ secrets.TO_EMAIL_ADDRESS }}
          from: GitHub Actions
          content_type: text/html
```

上面代码中，发送邮件使用的是一个已经写好的action，只要配几个参数就可以用。参数之中，邮件SMTP服务器的用户名和密码，使用的是加密变量，需要在项目的`settings/secrets`菜单里面设置。

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails6.png)

[完整的配置文件](https://github.com/JavenJin/weather-action/blob/main/.github/workflows/weather.yml)如下：

```yaml
name: 'GitHub Action Weather Bot'

on:
  push:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 0 * * *'

jobs:
  bot:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: 'Checkout codes'
        uses: actions/checkout@v1
      - name: 'Get Weather'
        run: bash ./weather.sh
      - name: 'Get Date'
        run: echo "REPORT_DATE=$(TZ=':Asia/Xian' date '+%Y-%m-%d %T')" >> $GITHUB_ENV
      - name: 'Send mail'
        uses: dawidd6/action-send-mail@master
        with:
          server_address: smtp.163.com
          server_port: 465
          username: ${{ secrets.MAIL_USERNAME }}
          password: ${{ secrets.MAIL_PASSWORD }}
          subject: Xian Weather Report (${{env.REPORT_DATE}})
          body: file://result.html
          to: ${{ secrets.TO_EMAIL_ADDRESS }}
          from: GitHub Actions
          content_type: text/html
```

写好配置，推送到仓库以后，就可以每天清早收到一封天气预报邮件了。在这个基础上不难扩展，可以定时执行各种脚本（比如每5分钟检查一次某个网站是否在线），然后将结果发到指定的渠道等等。

## 成功发送

配置成功后，每天固定时间都会接收到当天的天气邮件。

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails7.png)

Commit message:

Update GitHub Actions Sending Timed Weather Emails

content/post/Tools/GitHub Actions Sending Timed Weather Emails/index.md, after:

---
title: GitHub Actions (Sending Timed Weather Emails)
description: GitHub Actions：定时发送天气邮件
date: '2023-11-28'
categories:
    - Tools
tags:
    - Tools
---

# GitHub Actions: Sending Timed Weather Emails

Toward the end of 2019, GitHub officially opened up [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions), a feature that can be used for free.

GitHub Actions is a CI/CD (Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment) tool, but it can also be used as a code runtime environment. It's very powerful and can do a lot of tricks.

Here's an example of what you can do with GitHub Actions: run a script once a day to get the weather forecast and send an email.

The full code is available from the [GitHub](https://github.com/JavenJin/weather-action) repository.

## Get the weather forecast

The website [wttr.in](wttr.in) supports requesting weather forecasts using the command line.

```bash
curl wttr.in
```

The above command will return, the weather for the current IP address.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails1.png)

We can specify the city in the URL.

```bash
curl wttr.in/Xian
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails2.png)

The returned data can be saved to a file to be sent later, using the `-o` parameter of the `curl` command.

```bash
curl -o result.html wttr.in/Xian
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails3.png)

wttr.in allows customization of the format and content of the weather forecast, as detailed in [https://github.com/chubin/wttr.in](https://github.com/chubin/wttr.in), which will not be expanded upon here. The final encapsulated script [weather.sh](https://github.com/JavenJin/weather-action/blob/main/weather.sh), complete with code, is as follows:

```bash
#!/bin/sh

set -eux

CITY=Xian
LANGUAGE="zh-CN"
UNIT=m

curl \
  -H "Accept-Language: $LANGUAGE" \
  -o result.html \
  wttr.in/$CITY?format=4\&$UNIT
```

## Configuring an Outgoing Mail Account

I use the free sending service of NetEase 163 mailbox, or you can use other mailboxes.

You need to first generate an authorization code in your Netflix 163 email.

1. Login to Netease 163 mailbox（[https://mail.163.com/](https://mail.163.com/)）

2. Click on Settings and choose to set POP3/SMTP/IMAP

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails4.png)

3. Click Add Authorization Password to save that authorization password

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails5.png)

## Configuring GitHub Actions

Triggering GitHub Actions requires that you create a new `.github/workflows` subdirectory in your project repository with a YAML-formatted configuration file with any filename you want.GitHub will run the Actions as soon as it finds the configuration file.

The first part of the configuration file is the trigger condition.

```yaml
name: 'GitHub Action Weather Bot'

on:
  push:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 0 * * *'
```

In the above code, the `name` field is the description of the configuration file and the `on` field is the trigger condition. We specify two conditions for triggering, the first is code Push into the repository, the second is a timed task that runs every day at 0:00 international standard time (8:00 am Beijing time).

Next, there is the running process.

```yaml
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: 'Checkout codes'
        uses: actions/checkout@v1
```

In the above code, the runtime environment is specified to be the latest version of Ubuntu. the first step in the process is to get the code from the code repository.

Once you have the code, you can get the weather forecast.

```yaml
      - name: 'Get Weather'
        run: bash ./weather.sh
```

In the above code, the `run` field is the command to be run.

Finally, send an email.

```yaml
      - name: 'Send mail'
        uses: dawidd6/action-send-mail@master
        with:
          server_address: smtp.163.com
          server_port: 465
          username: ${{ secrets.MAIL_USERNAME }}
          password: ${{ secrets.MAIL_PASSWORD }}
          subject: Xian Weather Report (${{env.REPORT_DATE}})
          body: file://result.html
          to: ${{ secrets.TO_EMAIL_ADDRESS }}
          from: GitHub Actions
          content_type: text/html
```

In the above code, the email is sent using an action that has already been written and can be used with just a few parameters. Among the parameters, the username and password of the mail SMTP server are encrypted variables, which need to be set in the `settings/secrets` menu of the project.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails6.png)

The [complete configuration file](https://github.com/JavenJin/weather-action/blob/main/.github/workflows/weather.yml) is below:

```yaml
name: 'GitHub Action Weather Bot'

on:
  push:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 0 * * *'

jobs:
  bot:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: 'Checkout codes'
        uses: actions/checkout@v1
      - name: 'Get Weather'
        run: bash ./weather.sh
      - name: 'Get Date'
        run: echo "REPORT_DATE=$(TZ=':Asia/Xian' date '+%Y-%m-%d %T')" >> $GITHUB_ENV
      - name: 'Send mail'
        uses: dawidd6/action-send-mail@master
        with:
          server_address: smtp.163.com
          server_port: 465
          username: ${{ secrets.MAIL_USERNAME }}
          password: ${{ secrets.MAIL_PASSWORD }}
          subject: Xian Weather Report (${{env.REPORT_DATE}})
          body: file://result.html
          to: ${{ secrets.TO_EMAIL_ADDRESS }}
          from: GitHub Actions
          content_type: text/html
```

After writing the configuration and pushing it to the repository, you can receive a weather forecast email early in the morning every day. It's not hard to expand on this by executing various scripts at regular intervals (e.g., checking whether a site is online every 5 minutes) and then sending the results to a specified channel, etc.

## Successfully sent

After successful configuration, you will receive the day's weather email at a fixed time every day.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JavenJin/blog-image/master/content/post/Tools/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails/GitHub%20Actions%20Sending%20Timed%20Weather%20Emails7.png)
